it used Bullet Physics Library

it kept the game at 60 frames per second, v-sync locked, it rendered every frame in
under 16.67ms

it utilized eDRAM to achieve the 60 fps on Xenon. No AA, and is letterboxed to fit frame buffer
and render targets entirely with 10mb of eDRAM.

it uitlized real-time soft shadows, incl translucent shadows passing thru fences and gates,
pixel-perfect material modeling and parralax mapping on rough warehouse surfaces to give
the world depth.

the games load times are buttery smooth as they compressed individual level data
to just about 8kb per track.

trials hd uses deferred rendering.
    instead of calculating final pixel colors immediately, the engine first rendered
    the scene geometry into a g-buffer, this stored bare data of the scene, like distance
    from the camera, surface normal vectors and material properties. once the g-buffer was
    built, lighting was applied as a 2d post-process, meaning they could place dozens of
    dynamic lights in a scene w/o the geometric complexity of the track slowing down
    framerate.

the bike is a proxy of three spheres connected together, the bike collision model perfectly
matches the visual 3d model, the springs and shock absorbers are physically modeled, and the
rider's shifting weight dynamically atlered the center of gravity in real-time.

Xenon has a 3-core cpu capable of running 6 hardware threads. they isolated the physics
calulations to run on their own threads parallel to the game logic, graphics and audio. the code
was manually optimized using Xenon's VMX128 instruction set, hard-coding math so the cpu never
stalled while waiting for physics data.

all lighting was accumlated in a high-dynamic-range FP10 floating-point buffer.

instead of flat lighting, the game engine constantly calculated the avg amount of light
hitting the camera lens. it used this data to simulate the human eye's iris dynamically opening
and closing (tone mapping) as you launched out of a dark shadow and into the glare of say an
explosive barrel.

the 8kb track files work like this.
    they did not contain 3d mesh data, instead, were like highly optimized data structures,
    e.g., contains a list of internal object ids for paired w/ 3d coords and other data.

    when a level loads, the engine parses the data and instanitates the shared modular geometry
    directly from the pak archives loaded into ram. since assets are re-used, the game doesn't
    really ever have to fetch new textures or models from dvd/hard-drive.

16-byte vertex packing, a standard 3d vertex usually required around 44 bytes, position as 3 floats,
normal as 3 flaots, uv mapping as 2 floats, bla bla bla. the vertex format in THD was trimmed
down to 16-bytes. this was done through aggressive c++ bit-packing. position and uvs were likely
quantized into 16-bit half-floats or normalized integers. normals were likely packed into a
4-byte 32-bit integer using formats like 10-10-10-2.
